Inert Gas System are provided on tankers for the primary purpose of achieving an inert cargo tank atmosphere,i.e reducing the oxygen concentration to 8% or below.
An Oxygen concentration of about 11.5% or less does not support cumbostion, however a concentration of 8% or less is mandated as a safety margin.

Operations that are carried out by Inert Gas Plants are:
Inerting
Purging
Gas freeing

Inerting: The process of introducing inert gas in a tank to bring down the oxygen concentration to 8% or less 
to eliminate the risk of fire/explosion.

Purging: The process of introducing inert gas in an already inerted tank to reduce hydrocarbon gas concentration 
so that the tank atmosphere does not pass through the flammable region when the tank is suvbsequentky gas freed.

Gas freeing: The process of introducing fresh air in a tank to bring the oxygen concentration to 20.9% and remove
all flammable and toxic gases for the purpose of man entry.

The source of inert gas is either flue gases from a boiler onboard or from a inert gas generator.

Componenens of a Inert Gas Plant:
Boiler: The flue gases from the combustion in boiler are treated to be supplied to the cargo tanks.
Scrubber: The purpose of scrubber tower is to reduce the temperature of the flue gas and to remove any particulate
 matter and any soluble gases.
 In the scrubber the gas is bubbled through water and then passed through baffle trays, venturi slots 
 and impingement slots. The gas finally passes through a demister to prevent any carryover of moisture with inert gas.
 Blowers: Genrally two blowers are provided to supply the inert gas from scrubber. The total combined capacity of the blowers 
 should not be less than 125% of total discharge capacity of the cargo pumps.
 Oxygen analyser: The oxygen content of the inet gas supllied should not be more thsn 5%. The oxygen analyser
 measures the oxygen content and in case of it exceeding 5% the gas is vented to atmosphere.
 Temperature/Presuure sensor: The pressure and temperature of the the inert gas supplied is measured to 
 ensure that IG supply is stopped in case the pressure or temperatureof the IG is outside appropriate limits.
 Deck Seal: The purpose of deck seal is to prevent backflow of flammable gases from cargo space to machinery space when the 
 IG plant is not in operation.
 Non-return Valve: A mechanical non return valve is provided as an additional safety measure to prevemt backflow of gases.
 Deck Isolation valve: The IG dek isolation valve seprated the IG deck main from the IG supply line.
 IG deck islotaion valve is opened during IG operation and closed when not in use.
 PV Breaker: The purpose of PV breaker is to ptrevent underpressurisation and overpressurisation of cargo tanks in case the individual
 PV valves fails to operate.
 Mast Riser: The mast riser is used for thew pupose of venting to atmosphere.
 Cargo tank branches: Each cargo tank is provide with individual IG branch which are fitted with islotaion valve with a locing mechanism.
 